DOC: add changelog for Shapely 2.0 (#1442)
shapely/shapely: docs/changelog2.rst

    objects (use ``shape()`` instead).
  * ``empty()`` method

Breaking API changes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Some additional backwards incompatible API changes were included in Shapely
2.0 that were not yet deprecated in Shapely 1.8:

* The default of the ``preserve_topology`` keyword of ``simplify()`` changed
  to True (#1392).
* A ``GeometryCollection`` that consists of all empty sub-geometries now
  returns those empty geometries in ``.geoms`` (instead of returning an empty
  list) (#1420).
* The unused ``shape_factory()`` method and ``HeterogeneousGeometrySequence``
  class are removed (#1421).
* The undocumted ``__geom__`` attribute is removed. To access the raw GEOS pointer,
  the ``_geom`` attribute is still present (1417).

New features
^^^^^^^^^^^^

More informative repr with (truncated) WKT
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Support for fixed precision model for geometries and in overlay functions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* `set_precision` to conform a geometry to a certain grid size, and this will then also be used by subsequent overlay methods

> * `grid_size` keyword in overlay methods (`intersection`, `union`, `difference`, etc) 

Author: This also reminds me that we should actually expose this keyword in the Geometry class methods as well

Author: -> https://github.com/shapely/shapely/pull/1468

* Addition of ``get_precision`` to get precision of a geometry and ``set_precision``
  to set the precision of a geometry (may round and reduce coordinates) (#257)
* Addition of ``grid_size`` parameter to specify fixed-precision grid for ``difference``,
  ``intersection``, ``symmetric_difference``, ``union``, and ``union_all`` operations for
  GEOS >= 3.9 (#276)

Releasing the GIL
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* Release the GIL to allow for multithreading in functions that do not
  create geometries (#144) and in the STRtree ``query_bulk()`` method (#174)
* Released the GIL in all geometry creation functions (#310, #326).

STRtree improvements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* Specifying a `predicate` in the STRtree queries 
* Bulk queries

* STRtree improvements for spatial indexing:
  * Directly include predicate evaluation in ``STRtree.query()`` (#87)
  * Query multiple input geometries (spatial join style) with ``STRtree.query_bulk`` (#108)
* Fixed ``STRtree`` creation to allow querying the tree in a multi-threaded
  context (#361).

Bindings for new GEOS functionalities
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Several (new) functions from GEOS are now exposed in Shapely:

> * ``haussdorff_distance`` and ``frechet_distance()``

Author: We could turn this into links to the API docs (if we include this in the sphinx documentation site)

* ``contains_properly``
* ``extract_unique_points``
* ``reverse``
* ``build_area()`` (GEOS >= 3.8)
* ``minimum_bounding_circle`` and ``minimum_bounding_radius`` (GEOS >= 3.8)
* ``coverage_union()`` and ``coverage_union_all()`` (GEOS >= 3.8)
* ``segmentize`` (GEOS >= 3.10)
* ``dwithin`` (GEOS >= 3.10)

In addition some aliases for existing methods have been added to provide a
method name consistent with GEOS or PostGIS:

- ``line_interpolate_point`` (``interpolate``)
- ``line_locate_point`` (``project``)
- ``offset_curve`` (``parallel_offset``)
- ``point_on_surface`` (``representative_point``)
- ``oriented_envelope`` (``minimum_rotated_rectangle``)
- ``delauney_triangles`` (``ops.triangulate``)
- ``voronoi_polygons`` (``ops.voronoi_diagram``)
- ``shortest_line`` (``ops.nearest_points``)
- ``is_valid_reason`` (``validation.explain_validity``)

Getting information / parts / coordinates from geometries
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A set of GEOS getter functions are now also exposed to inspect geometries:
`get_dimensions`, `get_coordinate_dimension`, `get_srid`, `get_num_points`,
`get_num_interior_rings`, `get_num_geometries`, `get_num_coordinates`,

> `get_precision`.

Author: In theory this are also new functions exposing GEOS methods, like the section above. But it seemed worth to separate all those getters from actual spatial methods

  to True (#1392).
* A ``GeometryCollection`` that consists of all empty sub-geometries now
  returns those empty geometries in ``.geoms`` (instead of returning an empty
  list) (#1420).
* The unused ``shape_factory()`` method and ``HeterogeneousGeometrySequence``
  class are removed (#1421).
* The undocumted ``__geom__`` attribute is removed. To access the raw GEOS pointer,
  the ``_geom`` attribute is still present (1417).

New features
^^^^^^^^^^^^

More informative repr with (truncated) WKT
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Support for fixed precision model for geometries and in overlay functions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* `set_precision` to conform a geometry to a certain grid size, and this will then also be used by subsequent overlay methods
* `grid_size` keyword in overlay methods (`intersection`, `union`, `difference`, etc)

* Addition of ``get_precision`` to get precision of a geometry and ``set_precision``
  to set the precision of a geometry (may round and reduce coordinates) (#257)
* Addition of ``grid_size`` parameter to specify fixed-precision grid for ``difference``,

>   ``intersection``, ``symmetric_difference``, ``union``, and ``union_all`` operations for

Reviewer: This looks like a very interesting new feature. Are there any documents the team has floating around that discuss in more detail? Seems to move closer to fixed number type operations which might offer big improvements in robustness. However, with a bit of experience using CGAL usage of exact number types you often pay a hefty price in performance.

Looking around, I can see the GEOS 3.9.0 introduced this using the [OverlayNG](http://lin-ear-th-inking.blogspot.com/2021/02/overlayng-and-invalid-geometry.html). We do lots of intersections with lots of "real world" geometries, so this could be big for us.

Author: I am not aware of something on the Shapely side, but Martin Davis has some blogposts about his work (this is indeed enabled by the OverlayNB work). The main one: http://lin-ear-th-inking.blogspot.com/2020/05/jts-overlay-next-generation.html (and some others as well: http://lin-ear-th-inking.blogspot.com/search/label/overlay)

The JTS docs also have some more detail as the GEOS one: https://locationtech.github.io/jts/javadoc/index.html

Author: (and it would certainly be good to provide more details in the shapely docs as well, as this improvement is indeed a big thing)

Reviewer: Played around a little bit extending this [geopandas PR](https://github.com/geopandas/geopandas/pull/2184) to stress test the `set_precision`. Seems to have some very nice properties when you need to snap to integer coordinates (e.g. for vector tiles). `1.8.2` produces lots of invalid geometries with a naive snap function, whereas `2.0a1` and `set_precision(geom, 1)` always returns valid.

See https://github.com/bretttully/shapely-v2

Reviewer: Example of some stressful inputs to overlay functions

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/5830269/183032148-4f7f7401-80c3-446a-8dfb-c588a64cf0f9.png)
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/5830269/183032184-3f974808-8d90-4b5f-bd08-452dda9ce97e.png)
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/5830269/183032170-929e767b-f0c7-4d7b-9b0b-17dce5b64fb2.png)

Changelog
=========

Version 2.0.0 (in progress)
---------------------------

Shapely 2.0 version is a major release featuring a complete refactor of the
internals and new vectorized (element-wise) array operations providing
considerable performance improvements (based on the developments in the
`PyGEOS <https://github.com/pygeos/pygeos>`__ package), along with several
breaking API changes and many feature improvements.

For more background, see
`RFC 1: Roadmap for Shapely 2.0 <https://github.com/shapely/shapely-rfc/pull/1>`__.

Refactor of the internals
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Shapely wraps the GEOS C++ library for use in Python. Before 2.0, Shapely
used ``ctypes`` to link to GEOS at runtime, but doing so resulted in extra
overhead and installation challenges. With 2.0, the internals of Shapely have
been refactored to expose GEOS functionality through a Python C extension
module that is compiled in advance.

> The pointer to the actual GEOS Geometry object is stored in a lightweight

Reviewer 2: My feeling is that it is too technical for most people to have this section directly here at the top. The information here is not relevant for most users.

Maybe better to move this paragraph in a separate section, after the "vectorization" part?

Author: Good point. 
Or alternatively, I could also move this text to some "design" page in the documentation (xref https://github.com/shapely/shapely/issues/1236) and link to that here.

  in the future. To create an empty geometry, use one of the subclasses
  instead, for example ``GeometryCollection()`` (#1022).
* The ``shapely.speedups`` module (the ``enable`` and ``disable`` functions)
  is deprecated and will be removed in the future. The module has no longer
  any affect in Shapely >=2.0.

Breaking API changes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Some additional backwards incompatible API changes were included in Shapely
2.0 that were not yet deprecated in Shapely 1.8:

* The ``.bounds`` of an empty geometry has changed from an empty tuple to a
  tuple of NaNs (#1023).
* The default of the ``preserve_topology`` keyword of ``simplify()`` changed
  to True (#1392).
* A ``GeometryCollection`` that consists of all empty sub-geometries now
  returns those empty geometries in ``.geoms`` (instead of returning an empty
  list) (#1420).
* The unused ``shape_factory()`` method and ``HeterogeneousGeometrySequence``
  class are removed (#1421).
* The undocumted ``__geom__`` attribute is removed. To access the raw GEOS pointer,
  the ``_geom`` attribute is still present (#1417).
* The ``logging`` functionality has been removed. All errors messages from

>   GEOS are now bubbled up as Python exceptions (#998).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  GEOS are now raised as Python exceptions (#998).
```

> * Several custom exception classes defined in ``shapely.errors`` (that are no

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Several custom exception classes defined in ``shapely.errors`` that are no
```

>   longer used internally) have been removed. Errors from GEOS are now raised

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  longer used internally have been removed. Errors from GEOS are now raised
```

  as ``GEOSException`` (#1306).

> In addition, the ``STRtree`` interface was changed, see the section

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The ``STRtree`` interface has been substantially changed.  See the section
```

:ref:`below <changelog-2-strtree>``for more details.

New features
^^^^^^^^^^^^

> The Geometry subclasses are available in the top-level namespace

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Geometry subclasses are now available in the top-level namespace
```

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Following the new vectorized functions in the top-level ``shapely``
namespace, the Geometry subclasses (``Point``, ``LineString``, ``Polygon``,

> etc) are now available in the top-level namespace as well (#1330). Thus it is

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
etc) are now available in the top-level namespace as well. Thus it is
```

Not sure which is best, but it seems like linking to specific PRs is helpful for breaking changes, but less so for new features unless there is substantive discussion in those PRs that you want folks to know about.

Author: > Not sure which is best, but it seems like linking to specific PRs is helpful for breaking changes, but less so for new features unless there is substantive discussion in those PRs that you want folks to know about.

Sounds good

no longer needed to import those from the ``shapely.geometry`` submodule.

The following::

  from shapely.geometry import Point

can be replaced with::

  from shapely import Point

>   # or

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
or::

```

  import shapely
  shapely.Point(...)

Note: for backwards compatibility (and being able to write code that works
for both <=1.8 and >2.0), those classes still remain accessible from the
``shapely.geometry`` submodule as well.

> More informative repr with (truncated) WKT

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
More informative repr with truncated WKT
```

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The repr (``__repr__``) of Geometry objects has been simplified and improved
to include a descriptive Well-Known-Text (WKT) formatting. Instead of showing
the class name and id::

  >>> Point(0, 0)
  <shapely.geometry.point.Point at 0x7f0b711f1310>

we now get::

  >>> Point(0, 0)
  <POINT (0 0)>

> For large geometries with many coordinates, the WKT string gets truncated at

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For large geometries with many coordinates, the output gets truncated to
```

80 characters.

Support for fixed precision model for geometries and in overlay functions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

GEOS 3.9.0 overhauled the overlay operations (union, intersection,
(symmetric) difference): a complete rewrite, dubbed "OverlayNG", provides a
more robust implementation (no more TopologyExceptions even on valid input),
the ability to specify the output precision model, and significant
performance optimizations. When installing Shapely with GEOS >= 3.9 (which is
the case for PyPI wheels and conda-forge packages), you automatically get
those improvements already (also for previous versions of Shapely) when using
the overlay operations.

> An additional improvement in Shapely 2.0 is that the ability to specify the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Shapely 2.0 also includes the ability to specify the precision model directly:
```

  also be used by subsequent overlay methods. A ``get_precision()`` function
  is also available to inspect the precision model of geometries.
* The ``grid_size`` keyword in the overlay methods can also be used to
  specify the precision model of the output geometry (without first
  conforming the input geometries).

Releasing the GIL for multithreaded applications
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Shapely itself is not multithreaded, but its functions generally allow for
multithreading by releasing the Global Interpreter Lock (GIL) during
execution. Normally in Python, the GIL prevents multiple threads from
computing at the same time. Shapely functions internally release this
constraint so that the heavy lifting done by GEOS can be done in parallel,
from a single Python process.

.. _changelog-2-strtree:

STRtree API changes and improvements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The biggest change in the ``STRtree`` interface is that all operations now
return indices of the input tree or query geometries, instead of the
geometries itself. These indices can be used to index into anything
associated with the input geometries, including the input geometries

> themselves, or custom items stored in another object of the same length as

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
themselves, or custom items stored in another object of the same length and order as
```

the geometries.

> In addition, several significant improvements in the ``STRtree`` are included

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Shapely 2.0 includes several improvements to ``STRtree``
```

in Shapely 2.0:

* Directly include predicate evaluation in ``STRtree.query()`` by specifying

>   the ``predicate`` keyword. If a predicate is provided, the potentially

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  the ``predicate`` keyword. If a predicate is provided, tree geometries with bounding boxes that overlap the bounding boxes of the input geometries are further filtered ...
```

* ``reverse``
* ``build_area()`` (GEOS >= 3.8)
* ``minimum_bounding_circle`` and ``minimum_bounding_radius`` (GEOS >= 3.8)
* ``coverage_union()`` and ``coverage_union_all()`` (GEOS >= 3.8)
* ``segmentize`` (GEOS >= 3.10)
* ``dwithin`` (GEOS >= 3.10)

In addition some aliases for existing methods have been added to provide a
method name consistent with GEOS or PostGIS:

- ``line_interpolate_point`` (``interpolate``)
- ``line_locate_point`` (``project``)
- ``offset_curve`` (``parallel_offset``)
- ``point_on_surface`` (``representative_point``)
- ``oriented_envelope`` (``minimum_rotated_rectangle``)
- ``delauney_triangles`` (``ops.triangulate``)
- ``voronoi_polygons`` (``ops.voronoi_diagram``)
- ``shortest_line`` (``ops.nearest_points``)
- ``is_valid_reason`` (``validation.explain_validity``)

Getting information / parts / coordinates from geometries
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A set of GEOS getter functions are now also exposed to inspect geometries:
``get_dimensions``, ``get_coordinate_dimension``, ``get_srid``,
``get_num_points``, ``get_num_interior_rings``, ``get_num_geometries``,
``get_num_coordinates``, ``get_precision``.

> Several functions are added to extract parts: ``get_geometry`` to get the nth

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Several functions are added to extract parts: ``get_geometry`` to get a
```

geometry from a GeometryCollection or Multi-part geometry,
``get_exterior_ring`` and ``get_interior_ring`` to get one of the rings of a

> Polygon, ``get_point`` to get the nth point of a linestring or linearring,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Polygon, ``get_point`` to get a point (vertex) of a linestring or linearring,
```

and ``get_x``, ``get_y`` and ``get_z`` to get the x/y/z coordinate of a
Point.

> In addition, methods to extract all parts or coordinates at once were added:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Methods to extract all parts or coordinates at once have been added:
```

* The ``get_parts`` function can be used to get individual parts of an array of multipart
  geometries.
* The ``get_rings`` function, similar as ``get_parts`` but specifically
  to extract the rings of Polygon geometries.
* The ``get_coordinates`` function to get all coordinates from a geometry or
  array of goemetries as an array of floats.

Each of those three functions has an optional ``return_index`` keyword, which
allows to also return the indexes of the original geometries in the source
array.

Prepared geometries
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Prepared geometries are now no longer separate objects, but geometry objects itself

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Prepared geometries are now no longer separate objects, but geometry objects themselves
```

can be prepared (this makes the ``shapely.prepared`` module superfluous).

The ``prepare()`` function generates a GEOS prepared geometry which is stored
on the Geometry object itself. All binary predicates (except ``equals``) will

> make use of this, if the input geometry has been prepared. Helper functions

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
make use of this if the input geometry has already been prepared. Helper functions
```

``destroy_prepared`` and ``is_prepared`` are also available.

GeoJSON IO
~~~~~~~~~~

* Added GeoJSON input/output capabilities (``shapely.from_geojson``,
  ``shapely.to_geojson``) for GEOS >= 3.10 (#413).

Other improvements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* Added ``shapely.force_2d`` and ``shapely.force_3d`` to change the dimensionality of
  the coordinates in a geometry.

> * Addition of a ``total_bounds()`` function.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Addition of a ``total_bounds()`` function to return the outer bounds of an array of geometries.
```

* Added :func:`.empty` to create a geometry array pre-filled with None
  or with empty geometries.
* Performance improvement in constructing LineStrings or LinearRings from
  numpy arrays for GEOS >= 3.10.
* Updated the :func:`box() <shapely.creation.box>` ufunc to use internal C
  function for creating polygon (about 2x faster) and added ``ccw`` parameter
  to create polygon in counterclockwise (default) or clockwise direction.
* Start of a benchmarking suite using ASV.

> Utilities

Reviewer 2: This is no heading, a line with tildes should be added

* Added ``shapely.testing.assert_geometries_equal``.

Bug fixes
~~~~~~~~~

* Fixed several corner cases in WKT and WKB serialization for varying GEOS
  versions, including:

  * Fixed the WKT serialization of single part 3D empty geometries to
    correctly include "Z" (for GEOS >= 3.9.0).
  * Handle empty points in WKB serialization by conversion to
    ``POINT (nan, nan)`` consistently for all GEOS versions (GEOS started
    doing this for >= 3.9.0).

**Acknowledgments**

Thanks to everyone who contributed to this release!
People with a "+" by their names contributed a patch for the first time.

* Adam J. Stewart +
* Alan D. Snow +
* Brendan Ward +
* Casper van der Wel +
* James Myatt +
* Joris Van den Bossche
* Keith Jenkins +
* Kian Meng Ang +
* Krishna Chaitanya +
* Martin Fleischmann +
* Martin Lackner +
* Mike Taves
* Tanguy Ophoff +
* Tom Clancy
* Sean Gillies

> * gpapadok +
> * mattijn +

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Giorgos Papadokostakis +
* Mattijn van Hoek +
```
